Taxonomy of failsafe levels (#579)
SovereignCloudStack/standards: Standards/scs-XXXX-vN-taxonomy-of-failsafe-levels.md

| Ironic Machine     | A physical node managed by Ironic or as a `server` resource in Nova.                                                                     |
| Ephemeral Storage  | Disk storage directly supplied to a virtual machine by Nova. Different from volumes.                                                     |
| (Glance) Image     | IaaS resource usually storing raw disk data. Managed by the Glance service.                                                              |
| (Cinder) Volume    | IaaS resource representing block storage disk that can be attached as a virtual disk to virtual machines. Managed by the Cinder service. |
| (Volume) Snapshot  | Thinly-provisioned copy-on-write snapshots of volumes. Stored in the same Cinder storage backend as volumes.                             |
| Volume Type        | Attribute of volumes determining storage details of a volume such as backend location or whether the volume will be encrypted.           |
| (Barbican) Secret  | IaaS resource storing cryptographic assets such as encryption keys. Managed by the Barbican service.                                     |

> | Key Encryption Key | IaaS resource, used to encrypt other keys to be able to store them encrypted in a database.                                              |

Reviewer: I a key encryption key really an IaaS resource? I thought key encryption keys are stored in configuration files and if this is the case, it is a configuration setting.

Author: The Glossary is for all maybe unknown phrases to be described. As this standard also concerns Key Encryption Keys, it should be noted in the glossary

| Floating IP        | IaaS resource, an IP that is usually routed and accessible from external networks.                                                       |
| Disk               | A physical disk drive (e.g. HDD, SSD) in the infrastructure.                                                                             |

> | Node               | A physical machine in the infrastructure.                                                                                                |

Reviewer: If we list hardware resources, does it make sense to mention network node as an additional main single-point-of-failure?

```suggestion
| Node               | A physical machine in the infrastructure providing computational and/or storage capabilities.                                                                                                | Network node | A physical device providing network connectivity, such as switch or router. 
```

| network connectivity (materialization) | | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P | T |
| floating IP | P (if on disk) | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P | T |

For some cases, this only results in temporary unavailabilities and cloud infrastructures usually have certain mechanisms in place to avoid data loss, like redundancy in storage backends and databases.
So some of these outages are easier to mitigate than others.
A possible way to classify the failure cases into levels considering the matrix of impact would be, to classify the failure cases from small to big ones.
The following table shows such a classification, the occurance probability of a failure case of each class and what resources with user data might be affected.

:::caution

This table only contains examples of failure cases and examples of affected resources.
This should not be used as a replacement for a risk analysis.
The column **user hints** only show examples of standards that may provide this class of failure safety for a certain resource.
Customers should always check, what they can do to protect their data and not rely solely on the CSP.

:::

> | Level/Class | Probability | Failure Causes | loss in IaaS | User Hints |

Author: I am still thinking about the "user hints" column. Putting it next to the other columns is good from some perspectives, as it can be read: I want to achieve 2. Level of failuresafeness, which can be triggered by these failure causes that will result in these losses on IaaS level, so I can do, what is shown in the user hints.
But we wanted the classification not for examples for users, but mainly as a definiton for standards, so maybe we should not reference those standards here.
We could rather use an extra table with example actions(standards, "user has to to things",..) for each level/class or maybe this should rather not be in a decision record, but rather in a guide or so.

Reviewer: I agree with you, @josephineSei. Linking SCS standards in this table may cause a huge synchronization effort. We always have to update this DR, if referenced standards change. I appreciate the column user hints, but would limit to a textual explanation.  See my suggestions below...

|---|---|---|-----|-----|

> | 1. Level | Very High | small Hardware or Software Failures (e.g. Disk/Node Failure, Software Bug,...) | individual volumes, VMs... | [volume replication](https://docs.scs.community/standards/scs-0114-v1-volume-type-standard) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 1. Level | Very High | small Hardware or Software Failures (e.g. Disk/Node Failure, Software Bug,...) | individual volumes, VMs... | CSP MUST use volume backend, which is replicated OR users MUST backup volumes themselves and place them on an other host. |
```

| 2. Level | High | important Hardware or Software Failures (e.g. Rack outage, small Fire, Power outage, ...) | limited number of resources, sometimes recoverable | [volume backups](https://github.com/SovereignCloudStack/standards/pull/567) |

> | 3. Level | Medium | small catastrophes or major Failures (e.g. fire, regional Power Outage, orchestrated cyber attacks,...) | lots of resources / user data + potentially not recoverable | Availability Zones, user responsibility |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 3. Level | Medium | small catastrophes or major Failures (e.g. fire, regional Power Outage, orchestrated cyber attacks,...) | lots of resources / user data + potentially not recoverable | CPS SHOULD operate hardware in dedicated  Availability Zones. User SHOULD backup his data, hiself.  |
```

> | 4. Level | Low | whole deployment loss (e.g. natural desaster,...) | entire infrastructure, not recoverable | user responsibility |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 4. Level | Low | whole deployment loss (e.g. natural disaster,...) | entire infrastructure, not recoverable | CSP is able to save user from such catastrophes. User is responsibility for saving his data from natural disasters. |
```

Based on our research, no similar standardized classification scheme seems to exist currently.

> Something close but also very detailed can be found in [this (german)](https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/Grundschutz/BSI_Standards/standard_200_3.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=2) from the BSI.

Reviewer: I think BSI is known to non Germans. I suggest to use English translation

```suggestion
Something close but also very detailed can be found in [this (german)](https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/Grundschutz/BSI_Standards/standard_200_3.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=2) from the German Federal Office for Information Security.
```

> As we want to focus on IaaS resources and also have an easily understandable structure that can be applied in standards covering replication, redundancy and backups, this document is too detailed.

Reviewer: This DR should focus both IaaS and K8S resources. For now it covers IaaS resources only, but it should be extended by K8S resources,  soon. 

```suggestion
As we want to focus on IaaS and K8s resources and also have an easily understandable structure that can be applied in standards covering replication, redundancy and backups, this document is too detailed.
```

| Individual node shuts down                   | Medium      | Pods on that Node stop running                                                                                                                                       |
| Network partition / Network problems         | Medium      | Partition A thinks the nodes in partition B are down; partition B thinks the apiserver is down                                                                       |
| Kubelet software fault                       | Medium      | Crashing kubelet cannot start new pods on the node / kubelet might delete the pods or not / node marked unhealthy / replication controllers start new pods elsewhere |
| Cluster operator error                       | Medium      | Loss of pods, services, etc. / lost of apiserver backing store / users unable to read API                                                                            |
| Failure of multiple nodes or underlying DB   | Low         | Possible loss of all data depending on the amount of nodes lost compared to the cluster size, otherwise costly rebuild                                               |

> 

Author: I think we need another section here to better structure the document.
```suggestion

### Impact of the failure cases

```

| User Data on RAM /CPU | | P | P | P | P | T/P | P |
| volume-based VM | P (if on disk) | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P | P |
| ephemeral-based VM | P (if on disk) | P | P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P | P |
| Ironic-based VM | P (all data on disk) | P | P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P | P |
| Secret | P (if on disk) | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P | P |
| network configuration (DB objects) | P (if on disk) | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P | P |
| network connectivity (materialization) | | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P | T |
| floating IP | P (if on disk) | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P | T |

### Impact on Kubernetes Resources (KaaS layer)

:::note

In case the KaaS layer runs on top of IaaS layer, the impacts described in the above table apply for the KaaS layer as well.

:::

| Resource | Disk Loss | Node Loss | Rack Loss | Power Loss | Natural Catastrophy | Cyber Threat | Software Bug |
|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|Node|P| | | | | |T/P|
|Kubelet|T| | | | | |T/P|
|Pod|T| | | | | |T/P|
|PVC|P| | | | | |P|
|API Server|T| | | | | |T/P|

> For some cases, this only results in temporary unavailability and cloud infrastructures usually have certain mechanisms in place to avoid data loss, like redundancy in storage backends and databases.

Author: These sentences are IaaS-specific I think. They belong under the table "Impact on OpenStack Resources (IaaS)"

| 2. Level | High | important Hardware or Software Failures (e.g. Rack outage, small Fire, Power outage, ...) | limited number of resources, sometimes recoverable | CSPs MUST operate replicas for important components (e.g. replicated volume back-end, uninterruptible power supply, ...) OR users MUST backup their data themselves and place it on an other host. |
| 3. Level | Medium | small catastrophes or major Failures (e.g. fire, regional Power Outage, orchestrated cyber attacks,...) | lots of resources / user data + potentially not recoverable | CPSs SHOULD operate hardware in dedicated Availability Zones. Users SHOULD backup their data, themself. |
| 4. Level | Low | whole deployment loss (e.g. natural disaster,...) | entire infrastructure, not recoverable | CSPs may not be able to save user data from such catastrophes. Users are responsible for saving their data from natural disasters. |

> 

Author: A table like this for KaaS is still missing, I think, you are on it @martinmo ?

Reviewer 2: My goal was to end up with common levels for both layers.

Author: yes the levels should be the same.

To have two tables is just for better readability and structure (so you can directly go to either IaaS or KaaS impacts and hints.)

| ------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Availability Zone   | (also: AZ) internal representation of physical grouping of service hosts, which also lead to internal grouping of resources.             |
| BSI                 | German Federal Office for Information Security (Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik).                                    |
| CSP                 | Cloud Service Provider, provider managing the OpenStack infrastructure.                                                                  |
| Compute             | A generic name for the IaaS service, that manages virtual machines (e.g. Nova in OpenStack).                                             |
| Network             | A generic name for the IaaS service, that manages network resources (e.g. Neutron in OpenStack).                                         |
| Storage             | A generic name for the IaaS service, that manages the storage backends and virtual devices (e.g. Cinder in OpenStack).                   |

> | RTO                 | Recovery Time Objective.                                                                                                                 |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| RTO                 | Recovery Time Objective, the time within which a service must be restored.                                                               |
```

Reviewer 4: "the acceptable time"

Author: I wrote in other words, because to me your sentence was confusing. Please check, if that is, what you wanted to say.

Reviewer 3: yeah, that works for me

To differentiate also between the named measures the following table can be used:

| Term               | Explanation                                                                                                                                                                        |
| ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| High Availability  | Refers to the availability of resources over an extended period of time unaffected by smaller hardware issues. E.g. achievable through having several instances of resources.      |
| Disaster Recovery  | Measures taken after an incident to recover data, IaaS resource and maybe even physical resources.                                                                                 |
| Redundancy         | Having more than one (or two) instances of each resource, to be able to switch to the second resource (could also be a data mirror) in case of a failure.                          |

> | Backup             | A specific copy of user data, that presents all data points at a givne time. Usually managed by users themself, read only and never stored in the same place as the original data. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Backup             | A specific copy of user data, that presents all data points at a given time. Usually managed by users themself, read only and never stored in the same place as the original data. |
```

### Failsafe Levels and RTO

As this documents classifies failure case with very broad impacts and it is written in regards of mostly IaaS and KaaS, there cannot be one simple RTO set.
It should be taken into consideration that the RTO for IaaS and KaaS means to make user data available again through measures within the infrastructure.
But this will not be effective, when there is no backup of the user data or a redundancy of it already in place.
The different failsafe levels, measures and impacts will lead to very different RTOs.
For example a storage disk that has a failure will result in an RTO of 0 seconds, when the storage backend uses internal replication and still has two replicas of the user data.

> While in the worst case of a natural disaster, most likely a severe fire, the whole deployment will be lost and if there were no off-site backups done by users there will be no RTO, because the data cannot be recovered anymore.

Reviewer 4: Maybe the usage of RTO was meant differently by the writer here. In general, RTO is a set time frame (based on risk analysis or BCM), not a measurement of things that happen. What more likely fits here in this paragraph is **MTTR**, mean time to repair.

Author: I rephrased the paragraph, could you look over it again please?

Reviewer 4: :+1:

#### Environmental

Note that probability for these scenarios is dependent on the location.

| Failure Scenario | Probability | Consequences | Failsafe Level Coverage |
|----|-----|----|----|
| Fire | Low | permanent Disk and Host loss in the affected zone | L3 |
| Flood | Very Low | permanent Disk and Host loss in the affected region | L4 |
| Earthquake | Very Low | permanent Disk and Host loss in the affected region | L4 |
| Storm/Tornado | Low | permanent Disk and Host loss in the affected region | L4 |

As we consider mainly deployments in central Europe, the probability of earthquakes is low and in the rare case of such an event the severity is also low compared to other regions in the world (e.g. the pacific ring of fire).
The event of a flood will most likely come from overflowing rivers instead of storm floods from a sea.
There can be measures taken, to reduce the probability and severity of a flooding event in central Europe due to simply choosing a different location for a deployment.

#### Software Related

| Failure Scenario | Probability | Consequences | Failsafe Level Coverage |
|----|-----|----|----|

> | Software bug (major) | Low to Medium | permanent loss or compromise of data that trigger the bug up to data on the whole physical machine | L3 |

Reviewer 3: As you write below:
```suggestion
| Software bug (major) | Low to Medium | permanent loss or compromise of data that trigger the bug up to data on the whole deployment | L3 |
```

| Failure Scenario | Probability | Consequences | Failsafe Level Coverage |
|----|-----|----|----|
| Minor operating error | High | Temporary outage | L1 |
| Major operating error | Low | Permanent loss of data | L3 |
| Cyber attack (minor) | Very High | permanent loss or compromise of data on affected Disk and Host | L1 |
| Cyber attack (major) | Medium | permanent loss or compromise of data on affected Disk and Host | L3 |

Mistakes in maintaining a data center will always happen.
To reduce the probability of such a mistake, measures are needed to reduce human error, which is more an issue of sociology and psychology instead of computer science.
On the other side an attack on an infrastructure cannot be avoided by this.
Instead every deployment needs to be prepared for an attack all the time, e.g. through security updates.
The severity of Cyber attacks can also vary broadly: from denial-of-service attacks, which should only be a temporary issue, up until coordinated attacks to steal or destroy data, which could also affect a whole deployment.
The easier an attack is, the more frequently it will be used by various persons and organizations up to be just daily business.

> Major attacks are often orchestrated and require speicif knowledge e.g. of Day-0 Bugs or the attacked infrastructure.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Major attacks are often orchestrated and require specific knowledge e.g. of Day-0 Bugs or the attacked infrastructure.
```

| Key Encryption Key | IaaS resource, used to encrypt other keys to be able to store them encrypted in a database.                                              | L3, L4            |
| Floating IP        | IaaS resource, an IP that is usually routed and accessible from external networks.                                                       | L3, L4            |

#### KaaS Layer (Kubernetes Resources)

A detailed list of consequnces for certain failures can be found in the [Kubernetes docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/debug/debug-cluster/).
The following table gives an overview about certain resources on the KaaS Layer and in which failsafe classes they are affected:

| Resource(s)        | Explanation                                                                                                                              | Affected by Level |
| ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------- |

> | Pod                | Kubernetes object that represents a workload to be executed, consisting of one or more containers.                                       | ???               |

Reviewer 5: I want to ask if the `Affected by Level` column will be filled in, or are the question marks intended to remain there?

Author: It should be filled. But that is the point I need help with, as I have up to now mostly worked with the IaaS Layer, not the KaaS Layer.

Reviewer 6: Hi @michal-gubricky and @josephineSei,
@DEiselt and I removed the questions marks now to fill in the levels

Reviewer 5: Thanks, I will take a look at it.

Reviewer 5: The changes look good to me. I will resolve this thread.

In consequence these levels should be used in standards concerning redundancy or failure safety.

Based on our research, no similar standardized classification scheme seems to exist currently.
Something close but also very detailed is the [BSI-Standard 200-3 (german)][bsi-200-3] published by the German Federal Office for Information Security.
As we want to focus on IaaS and K8s resources and also have an easily understandable structure that can be applied in standards covering replication, redundancy and backups, this document is too detailed.

[bsi-200-3]: https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/Grundschutz/BSI_Standards/standard_200_3.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=2

## Decision

### Failsafe Levels

This Decision Record defines **four** failsafe levels, each of which describe what kind of failures have to
be tolerated by a provided service.

In general, the lowest, **level 1**, describes isolated/local failures which can occur very frequently, whereas
the highest, **level 4**, describes relatively unlikely failures that impact a whole or even multiple datacenter(s):

> | Level | Probability | Impact                | Examples |

Author: I'm still not sure, if we should start with this. I know there are two was to present a decision. Mine was: 1. explain everything that leads to that decision and 2. the decision.
Now it is the other way around: 1. decision 2. why did we come to that decision.

This is just my personal style: I like having the explanation before. But we can have a discussion about this, maybe for this long long topic, people do not want to read through everything and come to the most important table quickly.

<!--
TODO: how do we arrive at these probabilities?
-->

#### Environmental

Note that probability for these scenarios is dependent on the location.

| Failure Scenario | Probability | Consequences | Failsafe Level Coverage |
|----|-----|----|----|
| Fire | Medium | permanent Disk and Host loss in the affected zone | L3 |
| Flood | Low | permanent Disk and Host loss in the affected region | L4 |
| Earthquake | Very Low | permanent Disk and Host loss in the affected region | L4 |
| Storm/Tornado | Low | permanent Disk and Host loss in the affected region | L4 |

#### Human Interference

| Failure Scenario | Probability | Consequences | Failsafe Level Coverage |
|----|-----|----|----|
| Minor operating error | High | Temporary outage | L1 |
| Major operating error | Low | Permanent loss of data | L3 |

## Consequences

Using the definition of levels established in this decision record throughout all SCS standards would allow readers to understand up to which level certain procedures or aspects of resources (e.g. volume types or a backend requiring redundancy) would protect their data and/or resource availability.

> ### General Terms

Author: Were these tables the glossary before? Because it looks a little bit like it and would explain anjas comment and my answer. 

I don't get completely what you want to achieve with having these down here? what should this whole part of the decision record about?

the highest, **level 4**, describes relatively unlikely failures that impact a whole or even multiple datacenter(s):

| Level | Probability | Impact                | Examples |
| -     | -           | -                     | -       |
| 1     | Very High   | small Hardware Issue  | Disk failure, RAM failure, small software bug |
| 2     | High        | Rack-wide             | Rack outage, power outage, small fire |
| 3     | Medium      | site-wide (temporary) | Regional power outage, huge fire, orchestrated cyber attack |
| 4     | Low         | site destruction      | Natural disaster |

For example, a provided service with failsafe level 2 tolerates a rack outage (because there is some kind of
redundancy in place.)

There are some *general* consequences, that can be addressed by CSPs and users in the following ways:

| Level | consequences for CSPs | consequences for Users |
|---|-----|-----|
| 1. Level | CSPs MUST operate replicas for important components (e.g. replicated volume back-end, uninterruptible power supply, ...). | Users SHOULD backup their data themself and place it on an other host. |

> | 2. Level | CSPs MUST operate replicas for important components (e.g. replicated volume back-end, uninterruptible power supply, ...) | Users MUST backup their data themselves and place it on an other host. |

Author: ```suggestion
| 2. Level | CSPs MUST have redundancy for important components (e.g. replicated volume back-end, uninterruptible power supply, ...) | Users MUST backup their data themselves and place it on an other host. |
```

> | 3. Level | CPSs SHOULD operate hardware in dedicated Availability Zones. | Users SHOULD backup their data, in different AZs or even other deployments. |

Author: CSP not CPS ;)

Using the definition of levels established in this decision record throughout all SCS standards would allow readers to understand up to which level certain procedures or aspects of resources (e.g. volume types or a backend requiring redundancy) would protect their data and/or resource availability.

### General Terms

| Term               | Explanation                                                                                                                              |
| ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Disk               | A physical disk drive (e.g. HDD, SSD) in the infrastructure.                                                                             |
| Host               | A physical machine in the infrastructure providing computational, storage and/or network connectivity capabilities.                      |
| Cyber threat       | Attacks on the infrastructure through the means of electronic access.                                                                    |

### Affected Resources

#### IaaS Layer (OpenStack Resources)

> 

Author: Affect resource table: we should add  from which level/class of failuresafeness, these resources are affected.

| Deployment, StatefulSet | Kubernetes objects that manage a set of Pods. |
| Job                | Application workload that runs once. |
| CronJob            | Application workload that runs once, but repeatedly at specific intervals. |
| ConfigMap, Secret  | Objects holding static application configuration data. |
| Service            | Makes a Pod's network service accessible inside a cluster. |
| Ingress            | Makes a Service externally accessible. |
| PersistentVolumeClaim (PVC) | Persistent storage that can be bound and mounted to a pod.                                                                    |

Also see [Kubernetes Glossary](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/glossary/).

## Old sections

### Impact of the Failure Scenarios

These failure scenarios can result in temporary (T) or permanent (P) loss of the resource or data within.
Additionally, there are a lot of resources in IaaS alone that are more or less affected by these failure scenarios.
The following tables shows the impact **when no redundancy or failure safety measure is in place**, i.e., when
**not even failsafe level 1 is fulfilled**.

TODO: why should we do that?

> #### Impact on OpenStack Resources (IaaS layer)

Author: Put into another document (like implementation record): Impact record.

| 3. Level | Medium | small catastrophes or major Failures (e.g. fire, regional Power Outage, orchestrated cyber attacks,...) | lots of resources / user data + potentially not recoverable | CPSs SHOULD operate hardware in dedicated Availability Zones. Users SHOULD backup their data, themself. |
| 4. Level | Low | whole deployment loss (e.g. natural disaster,...) | entire infrastructure, not recoverable | CSPs may not be able to save user data from such catastrophes. Users are responsible for saving their data from natural disasters. |

### Kubernetes Specific

TODO: merge this with new sections

A similar overview can be provided for Kubernetes infrastructures. These also include the things mentioned for infrastructure failure scenario, since a Kubernetes cluster
would most likely be deployed on top of this infrastructure or face similar problems on a bare-metal installation.

> Part of this list comes directly from the official [Kubernetes docs](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/debug/debug-cluster/).

Author: this should be up with "affected resources"

In consequence these levels should be used in standards concerning redundancy or failure-safety.

## Decision

First there needs to be an overview about possible failure cases in infrastructures:

| Failure Case | Probability | Consequences |
|----|-----|----|
| Disk Failure/Loss | High | Data loss on this disk. Impact depends on type of lost data (data base, user data) |
| Node Outage | Medium to High | Data loss on node / (temporary) loss of functionality and connectivity of node (impact depends on type of node)  |
| Rack Outage | Medium | similar to Disk Failure and Node Outage |
| Power Outage (Data Center supply)  | Medium | potential data loss, temporary loss of functionality and connectivity of node (impact depends on type of node)  |
| Fire | Medium | permanent Disk and Node loss in the affected zone |
| Flood | Low | permanent Disk and Node loss in the affected zone |
| Earthquake | Very Low | permanent Disk and Node loss in the affected zone |
| Storm/Tornado | Low | permanent Disk and Node loss in the affected fire zone |
| Cyber threat  | High | permanent loss or compromise of data on affected Disk and Node  |

> These failure cases can result in temporary (T) or permanent (P) loss of the resource or data within.

Reviewer: I like this table. It is a very good starting point to think about backup and failure strategies. IMO, its content is not in a final state. As well as the following paragraphs. They look a bit incomplete. We should take an other round on brainstorming to take OpenStack services and k8s resources and services into account as well. 

At the end, I like to see an overview on how use cases defined in upper table effect availability of all OpenStack and k8s resources and services. This overview MUST include all fail-safe strategies SCS project requires together with the use case they prevent. Maybe this overview would a separate standard or references other standards. We have to discuss this.

---
title: Taxonomy of Failsafe Levels
type: Decision Record
status: Draft
track: IaaS
---

## Abstract

Talking about redundancy and backups in the context of clouds, the scope under which circumstances these concepts work for various ressources is not clear.
This decision records aims to define different levels of failure-safety.
These levels can then be used in standards to clearly set the scope that certain procedures in e.g. OpenStack offer.

## Terminology

Image
  OpenStack resource, server images usually residing in a network storage backend.
Volume
  OpenStack resource, virtual drive which usually resides in a network storage backend.
Virtual Machine (abbr. VM)
  IaaS resource, also called server, executes workloads from users.
Secret
  OpenStack ressource, could be a key or a passphrase or a certificate in Barbican.
Key Encryption Key (abbr. KEK)
  OpenStack resource, used to encrypt other keys to be able to store them encrypted in a database.
floating IP (abbr. FIP)
  OpenStack resource, an IP that is usually reachable from the internet.
Disk

>   A physical disc in a deployment.

Reviewer 7: I think "infrastructure" is a better fit and resembles the physical scope best. "Deployment" has some organizational level vibes to it imo. Also applies to any further comments concerning this term below.

Node

>   A physical machine in a deployment.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  A physical machine in the infrastructure.
```

Cyber threat

>   Attacks on the cloud.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  Attacks on the infrastructure through the means of electronic access.
```

## Context

> Some standards in will talk about or require procedures to backup resources or have redundancy for resources.

Reviewer 7: I think a word is missing here.

This decision record should discuss, which failure threats are CSPs facing and will group them into severel level.

> In consequence these levels should be used in standards talking about redundancy or failure-safety.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
In consequence these levels should be used in standards concerning redundancy or failure-safety.
```

## Decision

> First there needs to be an overview about possible failure cases in deployments:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
First there needs to be an overview about possible failure cases in infrastructures:
```

| Failure Case | Probability | Consequences |
|----|-----|----|
| Disk Failure/Loss | High | Data loss on this disk. Impact depends on type of lost data (data base, user data) |
| Node Outage | Medium to High | Data loss on node / (temporary) loss of functionality and connectivity of node (impact depends on type of node)  |
| Rack Outage | Medium | similar to Disk Failure and Node Outage |
| Power Outage (Data Center supply)  | Medium | potential data loss, temporary loss of functionality and connectivity of node (impact depends on type of node)  |

> | Fire | Medium | permanently Disk and Node loss in the affected zone |

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
| Fire | Medium | permanent Disk and Node loss in the affected zone |
```

> | Flood | Low | permanently Disk and Node loss in the affected zone |

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
| Flood | Low | permanent Disk and Node loss in the affected zone |
```

> | Earthquake | Very Low | permanently Disk and Node loss in the affected zone |

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
| Earthquake | Very Low | permanent Disk and Node loss in the affected zone |
```

> | Storm/Tornado | Low | permanently Disk and Node loss in the affected fire zone |

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
| Storm/Tornado | Low | permanent Disk and Node loss in the affected fire zone |
```

> | Cyber threat  | High | permanently loss of data on affected Disk and Node  |

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
| Cyber threat  | High | permanent loss or compromise of data on affected Disk and Node  |
```

> These failure case can result in temporary (T) or permanent (P) loss of the resource or data within.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
These failure cases can result in temporary (T) or permanent (P) loss of the resource or data within.
```

Additionally there are a lot of resources in IaaS alone that are more or less affected by these Failure Cases.

> The following table shows the affection without considering any redundancy or failure saftey being in use:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The following table shows the impact when no redundancy or failure safety measure is in place:
```

Looking into the dictionary, I don't think "affection" has the meaning you intended here ;)

| Resource | Disk Loss | Node Loss | Rack Loss | Power Loss | natural catastrophy | Cyber threat |
|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
| Image | P (if on disk) | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P |
| Volume | P (if on disk) | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P |
| User Data on RAM /CPU | | P | P | P | P | T/P |
| volume-based VM | P (if on disk) | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P |
| ephemeral-based VM | P (if on disk) | P | P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P |
| Secret | P (if on disk) | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P |
| network configuration (DB objects) | P (if on disk) | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P |
| network connectivity (materialization) | | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P |
| floating IP | P (if on disk) | T (if on node) | T/P | T | P (T if lucky) | T/P |

> For some cases there are only temporary unavailabilites and clouds do have certain workflows to avoid data loss, like redundancy in storagy backends and databases.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
For some cases, this only results in temporary unavailabilities and cloud infrastructures usually have certain mechanisms in place to avoid data loss, like redundancy in storage backends and databases.
```

> So some of these outages are more easy to solve than others.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
So some of these outages are easier to mitigate than others.
```

> A possible way to group the failure cases into levels considering the matrix of affection would be:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
A possible way to classify the failure cases into levels considering the matrix of impact would be:
```

(re "affection" - see above)

> | Level/Class | level of affection | Use Cases |

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
| Level/Class | level of impact | Use Cases |
```

(re "affection" - see above)

|---|---|-----|

> | 1. Level | single volumes, VMs... | Disk Failure, Node outage, (maybe rack outage) |

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
| 1. Level | individual volumes, VMs... | Disk Failure, Node outage, (maybe rack outage) |
```

> | 2. Level | number of resources, most of the time recoverable | Rack outage, (Fire), (Power outage when different power supplies exist) |

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
| 2. Level | limited number of resources, most of the time recoverable | Rack outage, (Fire), (Power outage when different power supplies exist) |
```

| 3. Level | lots of resources / user data + potentially not recoverable | Fire, Earthquake, Storm/Tornado, Power Outage |

> | 4. Level | complete deployment, not recoverable | Flood, Fire |

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
| 4. Level | entire infrastructure, not recoverable | Flood, Fire |
```

> Unfortunately something similar does not seem to exist right now.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Based on our research, no similar standardized classification scheme seems to exist currently.
Thus, this decision record establishes its own.
```

## Consequences

> Using the definition of Levels throughout all SCS standards would allow readers to know up to which Level certain procedures or aspects of resources (e.g. volume types or a backend requiring redundancy) would protect their data.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Using the definition of levels established in this decision record throughout all SCS standards would allow readers to understand up to which level certain procedures or aspects of resources (e.g. volume types or a backend requiring redundancy) would protect their data and/or resource availability.
```

---
title: Taxonomy of Failsafe Levels
type: Decision Record
status: Draft
track: IaaS
---

## Abstract

When talking about redundancy and backups in the context of cloud infrastructures, the scope under which circumstances these concepts apply to various ressources is neither homogenous nor intuitive.
This decision record aims to define different levels of failure-safety.
These levels can then be used in standards to clearly set the scope that certain procedures in e.g. OpenStack offer.

## Terminology

Image
  OpenStack resource, virtual machine images usually residing in a network storage backend.
Volume
  OpenStack resource, virtual drive which usually resides in a network storage backend.
Virtual Machine (abbr. VM)

>   IaaS resource, also called server, executes workloads from users.

Reviewer: Why do we distinguish between IaaS resources and OpenStack resources? It there any added-value to categorize Virtual Machine as "IaaS Resource"

> ## Terminology
> 
> Image
>   OpenStack resource, virtual machine images usually residing in a network storage backend.
> Volume
>   OpenStack resource, virtual drive which usually resides in a network storage backend.
> Virtual Machine (abbr. VM)
>   IaaS resource, also called server, executes workloads from users.
> Secret
>   OpenStack ressource, cryptographic asset stored in the Key Manager (e.g. Barbican).
> Key Encryption Key (abbr. KEK)
>   OpenStack resource, used to encrypt other keys to be able to store them encrypted in a database.
> Floating IP (abbr. FIP)
>   OpenStack resource, an IP that is usually routed and accessible from external networks.
> Disk
>   A physical disk drive (e.g. HDD, SSD) in the infrastructure.
> Node
>   A physical machine in the infrastructure.
> Cyber threat
>   Attacks on the infrastructure through the means of electronic access.
> 

Reviewer: I know, it's bit picky and I like to have the same look and feel in our standards and decision records. I would display terminology as table and call it glossary.

```suggestion
## Glossary
| Term              | Explanation                                                                                                                                                |
| ----------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Image           | OpenStack resource, virtual machine images usually residing in a network storage backend.                  |  
Volume           | OpenStack resource, virtual drive which usually resides in a network storage backend.                           | 
| Virtual Machine (abbr. VM) |   IaaS resource, also called server, executes workloads from users.                                   | 
| Secret |   OpenStack ressource, cryptographic asset stored in the Key Manager (e.g. Barbican).                                    | 
| Key Encryption Key (abbr. KEK) |  OpenStack resource, used to encrypt other keys to be able to store them encrypted in a database.                                                                              | 
| Floating IP (abbr. FIP) |   OpenStack resource, an IP that is usually routed and accessible from external networks.       | 
| Disk | A physical disk drive (e.g. HDD, SSD) in the infrastructure.                                                                                    | 
| Node | A physical machine in the infrastructure.                                                                                                               | 
| Cyber threat | Attacks on the infrastructure through the means of electronic access.                                                       | 

```

Author: I took Markus table from the PR you mentioned above and adjusted it to comply.

For the title: I took the example DR from the standards repository. Maybe we should change the title from Terminology to Glossary there too.

## Context

> Some standards provided by the SCS will talk about or require procedures to backup resources or have redundancy for resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some standards provided by the SCS project will talk about or require procedures to backup resources or have redundancy for resources.
```

This decision record aims to define different levels of failure-safety.
These levels can then be used in standards to clearly set the scope that certain procedures in e.g. OpenStack offer.

## Glossary

| Term               | Explanation                                                                                                                              |
| ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | Virtual Machine    | Equals the `server` resource in Nova.                                                                                                    |

Author: That is a good point. We definitely need to separate between VMs and Ironic nodes.

So that in each standard that referenced redundancy, it can easily be seen how far this redundancy goes in that certain circumstance.
Readers of such standards should be able to know at one glance, whether the achieved failure safeness is on a basic level or a higher one and whether there would be additional actions needed to protect the data.

This is why this decision record aims to define different levels of failure safety.
These levels can then be used in standards to clearly set the scope that certain procedures in e.g. OpenStack offer.

<!--
TODO: goals vs. non-goals

> TODO: Resolve confusion between high availability vs. disaster recovery vs. redundancy vs. backups

Author: I moved them down and started writing about this a little bit.

| Level | Probability | Impact      | Examples |
| -     | -           | -           | -       |
| 1     | Very High   | Local       | Disk failure, RAM failure, software bug |
| 2     | High        | Moderate    | Rack outage, power outage, small fire |
| 3     | Medium      | High        | Regional power outage, huge fire, orchestrated cyber attack |
| 4     | Low         | Very high   | Natural disaster |

<!--
TODO: find better categories for impact (maybe site-wide, regional, and so on?) also: scale vs. impact?
-->

For example, a provided service with failsafe level 2 tolerates a rack outage (because there is some kind of
redundancy in place.)

From a cloud service provider (CSP) perspective, supporting these failure levels has the following *general*
consequences:

* **Level 1**: CSPs MUST operate replicas for important components (e.g., RAID, replicated volume backend, uninterruptible power supply).
* **Level 2**: CSPs SHOULD operate hardware in dedicated availability zones (AZs).
* **Level 3**: CSPs SHOULD operate hardware in dedicated regions.
* **Level 4**: Depending on the regions, CSPs may not be able to save user data from such catastrophes.

> More specific guidance on what these levels mean on the IaaS and KaaS layers will be provided in the sections

Author: I integrated a table to show both consequences for CSPs and users. We may discuss again, because you mentioned to already user AZs in Level 2, while this is imho more a level 3 consequence.
